Create handling-exception-notes.md (#114)
ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs: handling-exception-notes.md

# Python: Handling and Raising Exception / Gérer et soulever des erreurs

## Before starting

> 🚧 This files is not intended to be push to the main branch of dev-rel-docs.

Reviewer: typo
```suggestion
🚧 This file is not intended to be push to the main branch of dev-rel-docs.
```

Author: Done

Reviewer 2: to be pushed

> 🚧 This files is not intended to be push to the main branch of dev-rel-docs.

Author: Done

> It's just to give a chance for everyone to review the note I took 🚧

Author: Done

- [Version Française](#avant-de-commencer) :small_blue_diamond:
- This training is aimed at the backend developer, but everybody is welcome to
  read it.

> |:wave: To know more| |:--| |[Pozo Ramos, L. (2023,19 juin). *Python's raise:

Reviewer: This emoji and the table does not display on GitHub when I enable the "Display rich diff" option.
![image](https://github.com/ai-cfia/dev-rel-docs/assets/117961703/31d8f00a-6bc2-42e0-9c23-4710399d1c00)

Author: Done

Effectively Raising Exceptions in Your Code*. Real
Python](https://realpython.com/python-raise-exception/#chaining-exceptions-with-the-from-clause)|

### Handling Exceptional Situations in Python

> Not all exceptions in Python are errors. Example: The built-in
> [StopIteration](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#StopIteration)

Python errors have the `Error` suffix. The language also has a class for
warning; `Warning` to raise a flag on a condition that doesn't need to terminate
the program.

```python
# Always use Exception for your code
# Do not use Base Exception
class MyException(Exception):
    pass

# For examples see error link
class MyExceptionError(Exception):
    pass

# UserWarning is for warning generated by user code
# Warning is the base class for warning categories
class MyWarning(UserWarning):
    pass

```

#### Link to documentation for different exception types

|:warning:|:collision:|:interrobang:|
|--|--|--|
|[Warning](https://docs.python.org/3/library/warnings.html#warning-categories)|[Error](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#concrete-exceptions)|[Exception](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html#Exception)|

> Every exception have a [traceback](https://realpython.com/python-traceback/)

Reviewer: typo

```suggestion
Every exception has a [traceback](https://realpython.com/python-traceback/)
```

Author: Done

> Every exception have a [traceback](https://realpython.com/python-traceback/)

Author: Done

> attribute, also name:

Author: Done

- Stack trace,
- Stack traceback
- backtrace

#### How to handle exceptions

```python
colors = ["red", "blue", "green"]

# Basic handling of error

> try:
>     colors[10]
> except: IndexError:
>     print("Your list doesn't have that index :-(")

Reviewer: syntax error

```suggestion
try:
    colors[10]
except IndexError:
    print("Your list doesn't have that index :-(")
```

Author: Done

```

##### Steps to handle exceptions

1. Predict what exceptions can happen, sometimes you might want to fail the
   program to discover what exceptions are raised.
1. If custom exception, use the raise keyword
1. Determine where the exception needs to be handled in your code

### Raising Exceptions in Python: The `raise` Statement

> In Python, exceptions are raised, while in other languages like Java and C++,
> exceptions are thrown.

```python
# ...
raise [expression [from another_expression]]
#...
```

:warning: A `raise` keyword with no argument and no exception raised beforehand
will lead to a RuntimeError exception since no exceptions are raised or reraised.

> The `raise` keyword can take any expression that returns an exception class or
> instance.

```python

# From a function returning an exception
def exception_factory(exception, message):
    return exception(message)

raise exception_factory(ValueError, "invalid value")

# From a class instantiation
class MyException(Exception)
    pass

raise MyException("an error occurred")
```

> The `from` clause is optional. It allows the developers to chain exceptions
> together.

> |:warning:| Raising `Exception` instance is not considered best practice.|

Author: Done

...             )
...     if y == 0:
...         raise ValueError("denominator can't be zero")
...     return x / y
...
```

The divide function here raises different types of error: `TypeError` and
`ValueError`. Here's how it will behave with the `from` clause for `raise`:

```python
>>> try:
...     divide(42, 0)
... except Exception as error:
...     raise ValueError("invalid argument") from error
...
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
  File "<stdin>", line 6, in divide
ValueError: denominator can't be zero

The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 4, in <module>
ValueError: invalid argument

>>> try:
...     divide("One", 42)
... except Exception as error:
...     raise ValueError("invalid argument") from error
...
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 2, in <module>
  File "<stdin>", line 4, in divide
TypeError: number expected, got str

The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 4, in <module>
ValueError: invalid argument
```

> > If your note using from the message will be different. Without `from`, the

Reviewer: typo

```suggestion
> If you're not using `from`, the message will be different. Without `from`, the
```

Author: Done
